---
tags: [security]
projects: [spring-security]
---
:toc:
:all: {asterisk}{asterisk}
:images: https://github.com/spring-guides/top-spring-security-architecture/raw/master/images

= Understanding Spring Security

This guide is a primer for Spring Security, offering insight into the
design and basic building blocks of the framework. We only cover the
very basics of application security but in doing so we can clear up
some of the confusion experienced by developers using Spring
Security. To do this we take a look at the way security is applied in
web applications using filters and more generally using method
annotations. Use this guide when you need to understand at a high
level how a secure application works, and how it can be customized, or
if you just need to learn how to think about application security.

This guide is not intended as a manual or recipe for solving more than
the most basic problems (there are other sources for those), but it
could be useful for beginners and experts alike. Spring Boot is also
referred to a lot because it provides some default behaviour for a
secure application and it can be useful to understand how that fits in
with the overall architecture. All of the principles apply equally
well to applications that do not use Spring Boot.

== Authentication and Access Control

Application security boils down to two more or less independent
problems: authentication (who are you?) and authorization (what are
you allowed to do?). Sometimes people say "access control" instead of
"authorization" which can get confusing, but it can be helpful to
think of it that way because "authorization" is overloaded in other
places. Spring Security has an architecture that is designed to
separate authentication from authorization, and has strategies and
extension points for both.

=== Authentication

The main strategy interface for authentication is
`AuthenticationManager` which only has one method:

[source,java]
----
public interface AuthenticationManager {

  Authentication authenticate(Authentication authentication)
    throws AuthenticationException;

}
----

An`AuthenticationManager`
can do one of 3 things in its `authenticate()` method:

1. return an `Authentication` (normally with `authenticated=true`) if it can verify that the input represents a valid principal.

2. throw an `AuthenticationException` if it believes that the input represents an invalid principal.

3. return `null` if it can't decide.

`AuthenticationException` is a runtime exception. It is usually
handled by an application in a generic way, depending on the style or
purpose of the application. In other words user code is not normally
expected to catch and handle it. For example, a web UI will render a
page that says that the authentication failed, and a backend HTTP
service will send a 401 response, with or without a `WWW-Authenticate`
header depending on the context.

The most commonly used implementation of `AuthenticationManager` is
`ProviderManager`, which delegates to a chain of
`AuthenticationProvider` instances. An `AuthenticationProvider` is a
bit like an `AuthenticationManager` but it has an extra method to
allow the caller to query if it supports a given `Authentication`
type:

[source,java]
----
public interface AuthenticationProvider {

	Authentication authenticate(Authentication authentication)
			throws AuthenticationException;

	boolean supports(Class<?> authentication);

}
----

The `Class<?>` argument in the `supports()` method is really `Class<?
extends Authentication>` (it will only ever be asked if it supports
something that will be passed into the `authenticate()` method).  A
`ProviderManager` can support multiple different authentication
mechanisms in the same application by delegating to a chain of
`AuthenticationProviders`. If a `ProviderManager` doesn't recognise a
particular `Authentication` instance type it will be skipped.

A `ProviderManager` has an optional parent, which it can consult if
all providers return `null`. If the parent is not available then a
`null` `Authentication` results in an `AuthenticationException`.

Sometimes an application has logical groups of protected resources
(e.g. all web resources that match a path pattern `/api/{all}`), and
each group can have its own dedicated `AuthenticationManager`. Often,
each of those is a `ProviderManager`, and they share a parent. The
parent is then a kind of "global" resource, acting as a fallback for
all providers.

.An `AuthenticationManager` hierarchy using `ProviderManager`
image::{images}/authentication.png[ProviderManagers with a common parent,70%]

=== Customizing Authentication Managers

Spring Security provides some configuration helpers to quickly get
common authentication manager features set up in your application. The
most commonly used helper is the `AuthenticationManagerBuilder` which
is great for setting up in-memory, JDBC or LDAP user details, or for
adding a custom `UserDetailsService`. Here's an example of an
application configuring the global (parent) `AuthenticationManager`:

[source, java]
----
@Configuration
public class ApplicationSecurity extends WebSecurityConfigurerAdapter {

   ... // web stuff here

  @Autowired
  public initialize(AuthenticationManagerBuilder builder, DataSource dataSource) {
    auth.jdbcAuthentication().dataSource(dataSource).withUser("dave")
      .password("secret").roles("USER");
  }

}
----

This example relates to a web application, but the usage of
`AuthenticationManagerBuilder` is more widely applicable (see below
for more detail on how web application security is implemented). Note
that the `AuthenticationManagerBuilder` is `@Autowired` into a method
in a `@Bean` - that is what makes it build the global (parent)
`AuthenticationManager`. In contrast if we had done it this way:

[source, java]
----
@Configuration
public class ApplicationSecurity extends WebSecurityConfigurerAdapter {

  @Autowired
  DataSource dataSource;

   ... // web stuff here

  @Override
  public configure(AuthenticationManagerBuilder builder) {
    auth.jdbcAuthentication().dataSource(dataSource).withUser("dave")
      .password("secret").roles("USER");
  }

}
----

(using an `@Override` of a method in the configurer) then the
`AuthenticationManagerBuilder` is only used to build a "local"
`AuthenticationManager`, which is a child of the global one. In a
Spring Boot application you can `@Autowired` the global one into
another bean, but you can't do that with the local one unless you
explicitly expose it yourself.

Spring Boot provides a default global `AuthenticationManager` (with
just one user) unless you pre-empt it by providing your own bean of
type `AuthenticationManager`. The default is secure enough on its own
for you not to have to worry about it much, unless you actively need a
custom global `AuthenticationManager`. If you do any configuration
that builds an `AuthenticationManager` you can often do it locally to
the resources that you are protecting and not worry about the global
default.

=== Authorization or Access Control

Once authentication is successful, we can move on to authorization,
and the core strategy here is `AccessDecisionManager`. There are three
implementations provided by the framework and all three delegate to a
chain of `DecisionVoter`, a bit like the `ProviderManager` delegates
to `AuthenticationProviders`. A `DecisionVoter` considers an
`Authentication` (representing a principal) and a secure `Object`
which as been decorated with `ConfigAttributes`. The `Object` is
completely generic in the signatures of the `AccessDecisionManager`
and `DecisionVoter` - it represents anything that a user might want to
access (a web resource or a method in a Java class are the two most
common cases). The `ConfigAttributes` are also fairly generic,
representing a decoration of the secure `Object` with some metadata
that determine the level of permission required to access
it. `ConfigAttribute` is an interface but it only has one method which
is quite generic and returns a `String`, so these strings encode in
some way the intention of the owner of the resource, expressing rules
about who is allowed to access it. A typical `ConfigAttribute` is the
name of a user role (like `ROLE_ADMIN` or `ROLE_AUDIT`), and they
often have special formats (like the `ROLE_` prefix) or represent
expressions that need to be evaluated.

Most people just use the default `AccessDecisionManager` which is
`AffirmativeBased` (if no voters decline then access is granted). Any
customization tends to happen in the voters, either adding new ones,
or modifying the way that the existing ones work.

It is very common to use `ConfigAttributes` that are Spring Expression
Language (SpEL) expressions, for example `isFullyAuthenticated() &&
hasRole('FOO')`. This is supported by a `DecisionVoter` that can
handle the expressions and create a context for them. To extend the
range of expressions that can be handled requires a custom
implementation of `SecurityExpressionRoot` and sometimes also
`SecurityExpressionHandler`.

== Web Security

Spring Security in the web tier (for UIs and HTTP back ends) is based
on Servlet `Filters`, so it is helpful to look at the role of
`Filters` generally first. The picture below shows the typical
layering of the handlers for a single HTTP request.

image::{images}/filters.png[Filter chain delegating to a Servlet,70%]

The client sends a request to the app, and the container decides which
filters and which servlet apply to it based on the path of the request
URI. At most one servlet can handle a single request, but filters form
a chain, so they are ordered, and in fact a filter can veto the rest
of the chain if it wants to handle the request itself. A filter can
also modify the request and/or the response used in the downstream
filters and servlet. The order of the filter chain is very important,
and Spring Boot manages it through 2 mechanisms: one is that `@Beans`
of type `Filter` can have an `@Order` or implement `Ordered`, and the
other is that they can be part of a `FilterRegistrationBean` that
itself has an order as part of its API. Some off-the-shelf filters
define their own constants to help signal what order they like to be
in relative to each other (e.g. the `SessionRepositoryFilter` from
Spring Session has a `DEFAULT_ORDER` of `Integer.MIN_VALUE + 50`,
which tells us it likes to be early in the chain, but it doesn't rule
out other filters coming before it).

Spring Security is installed as a single `Filter` in the chain. In a
Spring Boot app the security filter is a `@Bean` in the
`ApplicationContext`, and it is installed by default so that it is
applied to every request. It is installed at a position defined by
`SecurityProperties.DEFAULT_FILTER_ORDER`, which in turn is anchored
by `FilterRegistrationBean.REQUEST_WRAPPER_FILTER_MAX_ORDER` (the
maximum order that a Spring Boot app expects filters to have if they
wrap the request, modifying its behaviour). There's more to it than
that though: from the point of view of the container Spring Security
is a single filter, but inside it there are additional filters, each
playing a special role. Here's a picture:

.Spring Security is a single physical `Filter` but delegates processing to a chain of internal filters
image::{images}/security-filters.png[Spring Security Filter,70%]

In fact there is even one more layer of indirection in the security
filter: it is usually installed in the container as a
`DelegatingFilterProxy`. The proxy delegates to a `FilterChainProxy`
which itself is a `@Bean`, usually with a fixed name of
`springSecurityFilterChain`.  It is the `FilterChainProxy` which
contains all the security logic arranged internally as a chain (or
chains). All the filters have the same API (they all implement the
`Filter` interface from the Servlet Spec) and they all have the
opportunity to veto the rest of the chain.

There can be multiple filter chains all managed by Spring Security and
all unknown to the container. The Spring Security filter contains a
list of filter chains, and dispatches each request to the first chain
that matches. The picture below shows the dispatch happening based on
matching the request path (`/foo/{all}` matches before `/{all}`). This
is very common but not the only way to match a request. The most
important feature of this dispatch process is that only one chain ever
handles a request.

.The Spring Security `FilterChainProxy` dispatches requests to the first chain that matches.
image::{images}/security-filters-dispatch.png[Security Filter Dispatch,70%]

A vanilla Spring Boot application with no custom security
configuration has a several (call it n) filter chains, where usually
n=6. The first (n-1) chains are there just to ignore static resource
patterns, like `/css/{all}` and `/images/{all}`, and the error view
`/error` (the paths can be controlled by the user with
`security.ignored` from the `SecurityProperties` configuration
bean). The last chain matches the catch all path `/{all}` and is more
active, containing logic for authentication, authorization, exception
handling, session handling, header writing, etc. There are a total of
11 filters in this chain by default, but normally it is not necessary
for users to concern themselves with which filters are used and when.

NOTE: The fact that all filters internal to Spring Security are
unknown to the container is important, especially in a Spring Boot
application, where all `@Beans` of type `Filter` are registered
automatically with the container by default. So if you want to add a
custom filter to the security chain, you need to either not make it a
`@Bean` or wrap it in a `FilterRegistrationBean` that explicitly
disables the container registration.

=== Creating and Customizing Filter Chains

The default fallback filter chain in a Spring Boot app (the one with
the `/{all}` request matcher) has a predefined order of
`SecurityProperties.BASIC_AUTH_ORDER`. You can switch it off
completely by setting `security.basic.enabled=false`, or you can use
it as a fallback and just define other rules with a lower order. To do
that just add a `@Bean` of type `WebSecurityConfigurerAdapter` (or
`WebSecurityConfigurer`) and decorate the class with `@Order`. Example:

[source,java]
----
@Configuration
@Order(SecurityProperties.BASIC_AUTH_ORDER - 10)
public class ApplicationConfigurerAdapter extends WebSecurityConfigurerAdapter {
  @Override
  protected void configure(HttpSecurity http) throws Exception {
    http.antMatcher("/foo/**")
     ...;
  }
}
----

This bean will cause Spring Security to add a new filter chain and
order it before the fallback.

Many applications have completely different access rules for one set
of resources compared to another. For example an application that
hosts a UI and a backing API might support cookie-based authentication
with a redirect to a login page for the UI parts, and token-based
authentication with a 401 response to unauthenticated requests for the
API parts. Each set of resources has its own
`WebSecurityConfigurerAdapter` with a unique order and a its own
request matcher. If the matching rules overlap the earliest ordered
filter chain will win.

=== Request Matching for Dispatch and Authorization

A security filter chain (or equivalently a
`WebSecurityConfigurerAdapter`) has a request matcher that is used for
deciding whether to apply it to an HTTP request. Once the decision is
made to apply a particular filter chain, no others are applied. But
within a filter chain you can have more fine grained control of
authorization by setting additional matchers in the `HttpSecurity`
configurer. Example:

[source,java]
----
@Configuration
@Order(SecurityProperties.BASIC_AUTH_ORDER - 10)
public class ApplicationConfigurerAdapter extends WebSecurityConfigurerAdapter {
  @Override
  protected void configure(HttpSecurity http) throws Exception {
    http.antMatcher("/foo/**")
      .authorizeRequests()
        .antMatchers("/foo/bar").hasRole("BAR")
        .antMatchers("/foo/spam").hasRole("SPAM")
        .anyRequest().isAuthenticated();
  }
}
----

One of the easiest mistakes to make with configuring Spring Security
is to forget that these matchers apply to different processes, one is
a request matcher for the whole filter chain, and the other is only to
choose the access rule to apply.

=== Combining Application Security Rules with Actuator Rules

If you are using the Spring Boot Actuator for management endpoints,
you probably want them to be secure, and by default they will be. In
fact as soon as you add the Actuator to a secure application you get
an additional filter chain that applies only to the actuator
endpoints. It is defined with a request matcher that matches only
actuator endpoints and it has an order of
`ManagementServerProperties.BASIC_AUTH_ORDER` which is 5 fewer than
the default `SecurityProperties` fallback filter, so it is consulted
before the fallback.

If you want your application security rules to apply to the actuator
endpoints you can add a filter chain ordered earlier than the actuator
one and with a request matcher that includes all actuator
endpoints. If you prefer the default security settings for the
actuator endpoints, then the easiest thing is to add your own filter
later than the actuator one, but earlier than the fallback
(e.g. `ManagementServerProperties.BASIC_AUTH_ORDER + 1`). Example:

[source,java]
----
@Configuration
@Order(ManagementServerProperties.BASIC_AUTH_ORDER + 1)
public class ApplicationConfigurerAdapter extends WebSecurityConfigurerAdapter {
  @Override
  protected void configure(HttpSecurity http) throws Exception {
    http.antMatcher("/foo/**")
     ...;
  }
}
----

NOTE: Spring Security in the web tier is currently tied to the Servlet
API, so it is only really applicable when running an app in a servlet
container, either embedded or otherwise. It is not, however, tied to
Spring MVC or the rest of the Spring web stack, so it can be used in
any servlet application, for instance one using JAX-RS.

== Method Security

As well as support for securing web applications, Spring Security
offers support for applying access rules to Java method
executions. For Spring Security this is just a different type of
"protected resource". For users it means the access rules are declared
using the same format of `ConfigAttribute` strings (e.g. roles or
expressions), but in a different place in your code. The first step is
to enable method security, for example in the top level configuration
for our app:

[source,java]
----
@SpringBootApplication
@EnableGlobalMethodSecurity(securedEnabled = true)
public class SampleSecureApplication {
}
----

Then we can decorate the method resources directly, e.g.

[source,java]
----
@Service
public class MyService {

  @Secured("ROLE_USER")
  public String secure() {
    return "Hello Security";
  }

}
----

This sample is a service with a secure method. If Spring creates a
`@Bean` of this type then it will be proxied and callers will have to
go through a security interceptor before the method is actually
executed. If the access is denied the caller will get an
`AccessDeniedException` instead of the actual method result.

There are other annotations that can be used on methods to enforce
security constraints, notably `@PreAuthorize` and `@PostAuthorize`,
which allow you to write expressions containing references to method
parameters and return values respectively.

TIP: It is not uncommon to combine Web security and method
security. The filter chain provides the user experience features, like
authentication and redirect to login pages etc, and the method
security provides protection at a more granular level.

== Working with Threads

Spring Security is fundamentally thread bound because it needs to make
the current authenticated principal available to a wide variety of
downstream consumers. The basic building block is the
`SecurityContext` which may contain an `Authentication` (and when a
user is logged in it will be an `Authentication` that is explicitly
`authenticated`). You can always access and manipulate the
`SecurityContext` via static convenience methods in
`SecurityContextHolder` which in turn simply manipulate a
`TheadLocal`, e.g.

[source,java]
----
SecurityContext context = SecurityContextHolder.getContext();
Authentication authentication = context.getAuthentication();
assert(authentication.isAuthenticated);
----

It is *not* common for user application code to do this, but it can be
useful if you, for instance, need to write a custom authentication
filter (although even then there are base classes in Spring Security
that can be used where you would avoid needing to use the
`SecurityContextHolder`).

If you need access to the currently authenticated user in a web
endpoint, you can use a method parameter in a `@RequestMapping`. E.g.

[source,java]
----
@RequestMapping("/foo")
public String foo(@AuthenticationPrincipal User user) {
  ... // do stuff with user
}
----

This annotation pulls the current `Authentication` out of the
`SecurityContext` and calls the `getPrincipal()` method on it to yield
the method parameter. The type of the `Principal` in an
`Authentication` is dependent on the `AuthenticationManager` used to
validate the authentication, so this can be a useful little trick to get a type safe reference to your user data.

If Spring Security is in use the `Principal` from the
`HttpServletRequest` will be of type `Authentication`, so you can also
use that directly:

[source,java]
----
@RequestMapping("/foo")
public String foo(Principal principal) {
  Authentication authentication = (Authentication) principal;
  User = (User) authentication.getPrincipal();
  ... // do stuff with user
}
----

This can sometimes be useful if you need to write code that works when
Spring Security is not in use (you would need to be more defensive
about loading the `Authentication` class).

=== Processing Secure Methods Asynchronously

Since the `SecurityContext` is thread bound, if you want to do any
background processing that calls secure methods, e.g. with `@Async`,
you need to ensure that the context is propagated. This boils down to
wrapping the `SecurityContext` up with the task (`Runnable`,
`Callable` etc.) that is executed in the background. Spring Security
provides some helpers to make this easier, such as wrappers for
`Runnable` and `Callable`.  To propagate the `SecurityContext` to
`@Async` methods you need to supply an `AsyncConfigurer` and ensure
the `Executor` is of the correct type:

[source,java]
----
@Confiuration
public class ApplicationConfiguration extends AsyncConfigurerSupport {

  @Override
  public Executor getAsyncExecutor() {
    return new DelegatingSecurityContextExecutorService(Executors.newFixedThreadPool(5));
  }  

}
----

